We are fortunate that people in our community worked hard to get the documentary film VAXXED: From Cover-up to Catastrophe to be shown at the Regal 20 Hollywood cinema in Sarasota. I chose to see it yesterday because there was a Q&A with the producers, Dr. Andrew Wakefield, Polly Tommey and Del Bigtree, afterward and I was curious. 
I’m not going to lie. My children range in age from 14 years down to a few weeks shy of 5 years old. We did our research and made our decisions about immunizations (which, incidentally, were not the same for all our children) a long time ago. I mainly decided to go because I am often asked about vaccines at some point in childbirth classes or talks with doula clients and I thought this would probably be as close to a mainstream film as a vaccine documentary could possibly get. Similarly to how The Business of Being Born brought me a wave of couples looking for a more intervention-free approach to childbirth. I felt I should probably go see it so I would know what clients were referring to.
Let me just say what surprised me: this is NOT an anti-vaccine film. In fact, at plenty of points along the way, SINGLE-DOSE vaccines are touted as a good thing. Laudable.
This documentary is about corruption. It is about a high-level scientist at the CDC who became a whistleblower when he saw things were not right. It’s about scientists “struggling with data” and “reformatting” charts to make data become “statistically insignificant”. It’s about data being intentionally and deliberately omitted from studies, about violations of medical ethics. It’s about the critical need for an independent safety board for vaccines, one that is removed from the CDC. We currently have the sickest nation of children ever seen before and we owe it to our children to study why. It’s about some really big stuff that deeply affects far too many families. In fact, really, many would argue it affects every single family, whether they have a vaccine-injured child or not.
Of course, the film shares some mind-boggling statistics, such as the exponential growth in the number of children diagnosed with autism. If we continue at our current rate, with someone in this country receiving an autism diagnosis every seven minutes, one of two children in 2032 will be autistic, including 80% of boys. More than 250 vaccines are currently in development (some as cures, not preventive measures). The cradle-to-grave vaccination industry is motivated because if a company gets just one vaccination on the recommended schedule, they can make up to $30 billion per year.
It may surprise some that vaccines are not classed as pharmaceutical drugs and therefore are not subject to the same testing and double-blind controlled studies as other drugs. This different classification means less rigorous safety controls, not to mention the laws in place right now that protect vaccine manufacturers. They don’t even have to pay for vaccine damages as determined by the “vaccine court” – it’s taxpayers who pay out those awards. The vaccine schedule put out by the CDC is determined rather arbitrarily. No studies have been done pertaining to combinations of vaccines. No studies comparing vaccinated to unvaccinated populations have been done.
So much is missing.
Again, while children are routinely given multiple vaccines in a day, no studies have been done to test the safety of the combination of vaccines the CDC currently recommends. Their studies tend to be reactive, not proactive. A study was mentioned during the Q&A which was done in mice. A group of mice was given 100 cells of disease A. They all survived just fine. Another group of mice was given 100 cells of disease B. They also survived. A third group of mice was given 1 cell of disease A PLUS 1 cell of disease B.
Most of those mice died.
While this may be an oversimplification, I think it illustrates the point well that when we give immunizations against, for example, measles and mumps, which are related diseases, in one shot, the results may be unpredictable. And this deserves to be studied. While many recipients will be fine, many will not be. There are some compelling statistics with regard to age of exposure (much less risk when the MMR vaccine is given after age 3 than between 12-18 months, for example), and race (African-Americans are more likely to be affected in the critical age range), sex (males are more likely to be affected than females), and genetics (consider the MTHFR gene, which plays a role in ridding the body of toxins).
So many factors.
Please note I did not come away from this film thinking all vaccines are bad. Not at all.
I came away feeling that parents everywhere deserve transparency when it comes to vaccine data. Parents and pediatricians alike deserve an unbiased scientific organization that performs and analyzes studies and issues true and accurate reports on the data, not an organization that has to “struggle with data” to make it conform to the results they and the pharmaceutical companies that fund their foundations wanted to see. We should put money into the studies that have been requested over and over again by families, by organizations that serve the adversely affected populations, even by politicians.
We cannot sit idly by as we are told that “vaccines do not cause autism” when so many thousands of families share the same story: the story of a typical child meeting their developmental milestones who suddenly regresses within days of a jab. Vaccines do not cause autism in all children, obviously. But all children are unique. Each has a unique combination of genetics, nutrition, environmental factors, gut flora and more. Until we know exactly what does cause autism, we cannot say with certainty that a vaccine or a combination of vaccines will not be the tipping point for any particular child. 
Check out the Hear This Well campaign. Check out VAXXED.
Note that the  film calls for the following:
Why does all this matter anyway?
It matters because as parents, we should have the right to make the best decisions we know how for our child. Of course we want to protect them. If we are comfortable giving single dose vaccines, those should be available. They used to be standard. The vaccines were well studied, successful, with minimal adverse effects. If it gives parents peace of mind, why deny them that option? Why, if public health is truly the number one concern?
It matters because pediatricians depend on the CDC to provide the most accurate and most recent information to them so that they can advise their patients. They deserve to have untainted information. They deserve to be able to offer their patients options, such as single dose vaccines.
California passed Senate Bill No. 277 which goes into effect in July of 2016. This will mandate vaccinations for school attendance. While medical exemptions are still allowed, already California authorities are asking schools to send in the exemptions so that parents and doctors can be identified and the reasons for exemptions can be evaluated. No consent is required from parents to have their child’s medical record shared. This is a slippery slope. What’s next? No vaccines, no health insurance? It’s food for thought.
Incidentally, did you know Florida tracks your immunization records in a statewide, centralized online registry? It’s called Florida SHOTS. You can opt out if you like.
VAXXED is still playing for about another week here in Sarasota FL so I highly recommend you go see it if you can. Bring a friend! I think you’ll be glad you did.
If you’ve seen it, please share your thoughts in the comments below! I’d love to hear them!
The trailer for the film can be seen here.
Videos of the Q&A sessions in Sarasota are shared on Del Bigtree’s Facebook page.    (You may have to scroll down to June 7th to find it.) 
A final note: I mentioned how the VAXXED documentary touched on scientific data being manipulated, reformatted, and omitted prior to publication. This may seem far-fetched and implausible to some. As a translator, I have had the opportunity to translate clinical trials, not involving vaccines, but pharmaceutical drugs. I have seen (and translated) the notes among scientific researchers deleting certain questions for or statements to clinical trial participants. In my limited experience, it is not inconceivable.  
Letter in which California authorities are asking schools to send in the exemptions:
